This is a derivative.
This is also a derivative.
And so is this expression. A
differential equation is essentially
just a bunch of derivatives and
functions put together into one large
equation. We define an ordinary
differential equation to be some
differential equation where the
dependent term y depends on one
independent term x.
A partial differential equation on the
other hand may have one independent
variable dependent on two or even more
dependent variables.
We can also describe differential
equations through their order kind of
like a polomial where we look at the
highest derivative and we can call it
some nth order differential equation.
There is a special class of differential
equations called linear differential
equations where essentially every y term
is by itself and the term before it only
depends on x. The solution to a
differential equation is just going to
be some function. Similar to how
polomials we substitute a value for x to
make sure 0 equals to 0. We could do the
same thing with a function, plugging it
back in, taking the derivatives, and
still double-checking that 0 equals to
zero.
However, there can be multiple solutions
to a differential equation. So, a slope
field is a very nice way to visualize
what the solutions look like. What you
do is plug in some specific point,
calculate what the derivative is at that
point and just draw the slope. If the
value is zero, then the line should be
horizontal. If the value is positive, it
should go up. And if the value is
negative, then it should go down. Then
all we need to do is draw lines that
follows the different slopes and we get
to see what the different solutions look
like. Sometimes we're also given an
initial condition, some specific point
that the function has to go through,
which we can then draw a line that
passes through that point.
Autonomous differential equations are
really interesting because the
derivative does not depend on x at all.
What this means is that we can find
specific ranges of y where we directly
know whether the slope is positive or
negative.
Hence we can directly split the
direction field into different sections
where we know solutions will increase or
decrease. Therefore drawing solutions is
extremely easy. So the question becomes
how do you solve a differential
equation? Let's start with first order
differential equations. And there's
already several different types of them.
So let's start with separable equations
where we can directly split the x and y
terms into some products. For this
example, we move all of the y terms to
one side and all of the x terms to one
side and integrate them separately, not
forgetting the integrating factor.
Moving terms around, we get our final
solution, which will be related to the
integrating factor. We can solve for
that integrating factor. If we're given
some sort of initial condition as
mentioned earlier
onto linear equations which we know have
to have this form as mentioned earlier
and if we divide a1 of x on both sides
we get this really nice form. What we do
with linear equations is we first solve
for something called the integrating
factor which is e to the power of the
integral of p of x. The reason we do
this is because this gives us a really
nice expression where we can directly
integrate f ofx with the integrating
factor and that gives us something
closely related to y. Exact equations
have to follow a very specific form
where the partial of m with respect to y
is the same as the partial of n with
respect to x. Now solving exact
equations is a really specific process.
You assume that there is some solution
that depends on both x and y. And the
idea is that taking the derivative of f
with respect to x gives you m and the
derivative with respect to y gives you
n. So all you need to do is solve for f
of x and y by taking one of the m orn's
integrating it knowing that it has lost
one of the terms due to taking the
derivative and then solving for f ofx
and y and setting it to zero. Now, the
reason differential equations are so
popular is because all you need to do is
say something like the change of a
population is directly proportional to
the population itself and you can get an
explicit solution, a solution that looks
like a population that you might expect
to grow or decay. Newton's law basically
says that the temperature of a specific
object will change directly proportional
to the difference between the
temperature of the object and the
surrounding temperature and the
solutions do look like temperatures that
we expect to see. Another very popular
differential equation is called logistic
growth where the change in population
not only depends on the population
itself but also how close it is to the
carrying capacity. So the graph looks
like something we would expect for some
population where there is a limit on how
high the population can go. Now let's
get to higher order differential
equations which are a bit trickier to
solve. So let's make it a bit simpler by
making the right hand side equal to
zero. These equations are called
homogeneous equations and they have some
really nice properties. For one, if you
have a list of solutions to these
equations, their linear combination is
also a solution. Another fact we should
know is that if we can't find
coefficients where solutions can cancel
each other, we call them linearly
independent. Kind of like linear
algebra. Furthermore, an nth order
homogeneous differential equation has to
have exactly n linearly independent
solutions. So putting all of these
together we get that the general
solution for a homogeneous differential
equation has to be a linear combination
of these independent solutions.
Now showing independence is going to be
a little bit different compared to
linear algebra because we're dealing
with functions. But one nice thing that
we have is called donskian which is
essentially a matrix except every row is
a derivative of the row above. And if
the ronskin is non zero for any x, then
we know that these functions are
dependent.
Here we see two really nice examples
where one never equals to zero and the
other always equals to zero. Now let's
solve a really easy example of
homogeneous linear equations. Constant
coefficients. Every single term in front
of a y has to be some specific number.
All you need to do is transfer it to its
auxiliary equation where every single
derivative just becomes a power in a
polomial. You solve for the roots and
depending on what the roots are, there
is really a specific formula for a
general solution that you can just plug
it back in.
Notice that each solution has two
different terms and we can verify that
they are independent and since there are
two of them, they have to form the
general solution.
Notice that all we need to do now is do
a bunch of algebra, solve for the roots,
and just plug it back into the formula.
The constants can then be solved through
a system of equations with two different
initial conditions. Now, let's say we
don't have a zero on the right hand
side. We do have something
non-homogeneous. What do we do? Well, if
we do have the solution to the
homogeneous solution where we know it's
some sort of linear combination which
can equal to zero. If we just add that
solution that solves for the specific g
of x at the end, that combination will
also be a solution. Now there are two
main ways to solve for this particular
solution. You either use the method of
undetermined coefficients or you use
lelass transforms. Let's start with the
method of undetermined coefficients
which is kind of just guessing. You're
essentially guessing what the form of
the particular solution is such that it
matches the right hand side. If the
right hand side is some sort of polomial
with degree 2, then you guess some
polomial of degree 2. If the right hand
side is some form of exponential, then
you guess some form of exponential. If
the right hand side has some signs or
cosiness, then you guess that it has to
have signs and cosiness because, well,
derivatives can switch the signs and
cosiness back and forth.
If your guess ever matches the
complimentary solution, then go up by a
factor of x because you're just going to
get the homogeneous solution again. Now,
let's walk through an example. We know
how to find the complimentary solution.
Find the auxiliary equation. Find the
roots and we're done. Now we try to
guess the particular solution. We first
guess that it has to have some sort of e
to the x. But it's already in a
complimentary solution. So we guess x e
to the x which is also part of the
complimentary solution. So we go up even
more. We guess x^2 e to the x. So all we
have to do is solve for the coefficient
in front of this term and that gives us
our particular solution and together
that gives us our general solution.
Another method which is probably a more
rigorous method. It's the applause
transform which by definition is just
some transformation where you put in a
function and you get out another
function. And the applause transform has
a really nice linearity property. And
what we can do is apply the applause
transform to the entire differential
equation. So it is in this applause
transform form and then do some
algebraic manipulation because it will
no longer have derivatives to get some
solution and then translate it back.
This will make more sense once we look
at an example. But first, here's some
really common applause transforms you
might see on the first or last page on a
differential equation textbook. So what
you would do is look at the table.
Rather than do an integral again and
again. Let's go through an example. We
are given a differential equation. We
are given the initial conditions which
is something we need to have for the
applause transform. What we do is take
the applause on both sides. Use the
linearity property to simplify it. Move
things to the left hand side. Move
things to the right hand side. And what
we get is one single expression purely
dependent on S. We then use some
algebraic techniques to simplify this
complicated expression to more simple
fractions because once we have these
simpler fractions, we can look at the
table again to translate them back to
the functions where they came from. And
using that, we get our final solution.
Now that we know how to solve higher
order differential equations, let's go
through another very common math
modeling example. We have some mass
spring system, some block connected to a
spring. We can stretch it outwards,
release it, it'll move back and forth.
How do we model this using differential
equations? Physics tells us that there's
a force pulling forward, which is F= to
ma, as well as the force of the spring
pulling it back, which depends on the
spring constant. So, this immediately
gives us a differential equation. Now,
let's make it a bit more complicated.
Let's say it was on the ground which
actually has friction. So in addition to
the current forces, there's also
friction that is pulling it back. So all
we need to do is modify the differential
equation to add another force where
friction depends on the velocity which
is the first derivative of x. Now
depending on how much friction there is,
the spring will move in very different
ways which you might expect. But there
is a very mathematical way to show how
this works. So we will split this into
four main damping cases. Whether there
is no friction, a little bit of
friction, quote unquote the perfect
amount of friction, or too much
friction. Notice that once friction is
involved, we have some decaying term at
the front, which makes sense. The spring
will stop over time. But once we have
too much friction, there's no longer a
sign or cosine. The spring just doesn't
move back and forth anymore. And we can
see a nice visualization of this as well
which is really nice. Now let's talk
about linear systems where you have two
dependent variables on one independent
variable. So you do have a system of
equations. If we have constant
coefficient linear systems, we can write
this in matrix form which is extremely
clean. Just as a quick reminder cuz we
will need this later. In order to
calculate igen values, you need to
calculate the determinant of a minus
lambda i and then you solve for the igen
vectors by finding the v's that makes it
zero. Now kind of similar to the second
order differential equations depending
on what I values we get, they will give
different solutions and it's the same
process as before. Solve for the igen
values, solve for the igen vectors, plug
them into the final solution. Just like
we did before, let's look at some
examples. The process is the exact same.
You're given a matrix. You're going to
solve the igen values. It's going to
fall into one of the three different
cases. You're going to plug them back in
to solve for the igen vectors and
together they give you the final
solutions. Now, what's interesting is
that these different IGEN values when
plotted also look extremely different.
And typically we can also classify them
by their stability. Just as a quick
example, let's say that the igen values
are negative. Well, the general solution
tells us that everything will converge
to zero over time. But what does the
graph look like? Well, the graph looks
like the same thing. A bunch of
different lines all going towards the
origin, which we call a stable node.
Now, what if the igen values are
positive? Well, all the solutions will
be going outwards and hence we create an
unstable node. Now what happens if one
value is positive and the other is
negative? Well, one vector is going to
go to zero and the other vector is going
to go to infinity. And this is what we
see in the graph as well. All of the
lines kind of following this horizontal
line to infinity.
Now let's consider the case where we
have complex values. Well, we know that
alpha term kind of tells the graph to go
inwards where outwards and a beta term
since it becomes cosiness and signs just
becomes a circle. So if alpha is
negative we have a stable spiral all the
solutions circling inwards. If alpha is
positive on the other hand then the
solutions will be circling outwards. If
alpha is zero then all we have are the s
and cosine terms. So the solutions will
just go in circles.
In the natural world, however, a lot of
differential equations don't have these
nice explicit solutions. So, we need
ways to estimate the real solutions. One
method is called Oilers's method. We're
using the definition of derivative. What
we do is essentially start at some
initial point and take small steps
according to the derivative to hopefully
approximate the answer at the end. Let's
go over an example. Let's say there's
this differential equation. We're given
the initial condition and we want to
approximate the value at like y of 0.2
for example. h is our step size. What we
essentially do is step forward one at a
time using the derivative to see how
much we step upwards to approximate our
final solution. And what we realize is
that we're not that far off from what
the actual answer is. One thing that
people in numerical methods love doing
is error analysis. Essentially seeing
how well this method actually works,
which we can actually prove using
Taylor's expansion. Using the expansion,
comparing it to what we actually are
using, we realize that each step we make
an air that's of the size h. So after n
steps, we get an air that is directly
proportional to our step size. This is
already pretty good. If our step size is
1 over 1,000, then we expect the error
to be around some factor of 1 over
1,000. But we can do even better called
the run cuda method. There's a lot of
different variations of it. I'm just
going to go over the fourth order
version where essentially you do a bunch
of algebra to get four different
variables and use those to calculate the
next step. Using this method, we can
show that the accuracy is much better.
If h is 1/10enth, then h to the 4th is 1
in 10,000. In this video, we covered a
lot of things regarding differential
equations. We speed ran a lot of them.
We kind of introduced some methods.
Obviously, this isn't going to cover
everything in a regular differential
equations course, but hopefully this
gave you a general idea of what you
might expect when taking such a course
in your undergrad career.